he last frontier of the biological sciences—the ultimate challenge—is to understand the biological basis of consciousness and the brain
processes by which we feel, act, learn, and remember.
During the past few decades, a remarkable unification
within the biological sciences has set the stage for addressing this great challenge. The ability to sequence genes and infer the amino acid sequences of the proteins they encode has revealed unanticipated similarities between proteins in the nervous system and those encountered elsewhere in the body. As a result, it has become possible
to establish a general plan for the function of cells, a plan
that provides a common conceptual framework for all of
cell biology, including cellular neural science.
The current challenge in the unification within
biology is the unification of psychology—the science
of the mind—and neural science—the science of the
brain. Such a unified approach, in which mind and
body are not seen as separate entities, rests on the view
that all behavior is the result of brain function. What
we commonly call the mind is a set of operations carried out by the brain. Brain processes underlie not only
simple motor behaviors such as walking and eating
but also all the complex cognitive acts and behavior
that we regard as quintessentially human—thinking,
speaking, and creating works of art. As a corollary, all
the behavioral disorders that characterize psychiatric illness—disorders of affect (feeling) and cognition
(thought)—result from disturbances of brain function.
How do the billions of individual nerve cells in
the brain produce behavior and cognitive states, and
how are those cells influenced by the environment,
which includes social experience? Explaining behavior
in terms of brain activity is the important task of neural science, and the progress of neural science in this
ral science, and the progress of neural science in this
respect is a major theme of this book.
Neural science must continually confront certain
fundamental questions. What is the appropriate level
of biological description to understand a thought process, the movement of a limb, or the desire to make
the movement? Why is a movement smooth or jerky or
made unintentionally in certain neurological disease
states? Answers to these questions might emerge from
looking at the pattern of DNA expression in nerve cells
and how this pattern regulates the electrical properties
of neurons. However, we will also require knowledge
of neural circuits comprising many neurons in specific
brain areas and how the activity of specific circuits in
many brain areas is coordinated.
Is there a level of biological description that is
most apt? The short answer is, it depends. If one’s
goal is to understand and treat certain genetic epilepsy disorders, then DNA sequencing and measurements of electrical properties of individual neurons
ments of electrical properties of individual neurons
might be sufficient to produce an effective therapy.
If one is interested in learning, perception, and exploration, then an analysis of systems of circuits and brain
regions is likely to be required.
The goal of modern neural science is to integrate
all of these specialized levels into a coherent science.
The effort forces us to confront new questions. If mental processes can be localized to discrete brain regions,
what is the relationship between the functions of those
regions and the anatomy and physiology of those
regions? Is one kind of neural circuit required to process visual information, another type to parse speech,
and yet another to sequence movements? Or do circuits
with different functions share common organizational
principles? Are the requisite neural computations best
understood as operations on information represented
by single neurons or populations of neurons? Is information represented in the electrical activity of individual nerve cells, or is it distributed over ensembles such
ual nerve cells, or is it distributed over ensembles such
that any one cell is no more informative than a random
bit of computer memory? As we shall see, questions
about levels of organization, specialization of cells, and
localization of function recur throughout neural science.
To illustrate these points we shall examine how
modern neural science describes language, a distinctive cognitive behavior in humans. In so doing, we
shall focus broadly on operations in the cerebral cortex,
the part of the brain that is most highly developed in
humans. We shall see how the cortex is organized into
functionally distinct regions, each made up of large
groups of neurons, and how the neural apparatus of a
highly complex behavior can be analyzed in terms of
the activity of specific sets of interconnected neurons
within specific regions. In Chapter 3, we describe how
the neural circuit for a simple reflex behavior operates
at the cellular level, illustrating how the interplay of
sensory signals and motor signals leads to a motor act.
Two Opposing Views Have Been Advanced on
the Relationship Between Brain and Behavior
Our views about nerve cells, the brain, and behavior
emerged during the 20th century from a synthesis of
five experimental traditions: anatomy, embryology,
physiology, pharmacology, and psychology.
The 2nd century Greek physician Galen proposed
that nerves convey fluid secreted by the brain and spinal cord to the body’s periphery. His views dominated
Western medicine until the microscope revealed the
true structure of the cells in nervous tissue. Even so,
nervous tissue did not become the subject of a special
science until the late 1800s, when the Italian Camillo
Golgi and the Spaniard Santiago Ramón y Cajal
produced detailed, accurate descriptions of nerve cells
but reached two quite different conclusions of how the
brain functions.
Golgi developed a method of staining neurons
with silver salts that revealed their entire cell structure
under the microscope. Based on such studies, Golgi
concluded that nerve cells are not independent cells
isolated from one another but instead act together in
one continuous web of tissue or syncytium. Using
Golgi’s technique, Ramón y Cajal observed that each
neuron typically has a cell body and two types of processes: branching dendrites at one end and a long,
cable-like axon at the other. Cajal concluded that nervous tissue is not a syncytium but a network of discrete
cells. In the course of this work, Ramón y Cajal developed some of the key concepts and much of the early
evidence for the neuron doctrine—the principle that
individual neurons are the elementary building blocks
and signaling elements of the nervous system.
In the 1920s the American embryologist Ross
Harrison showed that the dendrites and axons grow
from the cell body and do so even when each neuron
is isolated from others in tissue culture. Harrison also
confirmed Ramón y Cajal’s suggestion that the tip of
the axon gives rise to an expansion, the growth cone,
which leads the developing axon to its target, either
to other nerve cells or muscles. Both of these discoveries lent strong support to the neuron doctrine. The
final definite evidence for the neuron doctrine came in
the mid-1950s with the introduction of electron microscopy. A landmark study by Sanford Palay unambiguously demonstrated the existence of synapses,
biguously demonstrated the existence of synapses,
specialized regions of nerve cells that permit chemical
or electrical signaling between them.
Physiological investigation of the nervous system
began in the late 1700s when the Italian physician and
physicist Luigi Galvani discovered that muscle and
nerve cells produce electricity. Modern electrophysiology grew out of work in the 19th century by three
German physiologists—Johannes Müller, Emil du
Bois-Reymond, and Hermann von Helmholtz—who
succeeded in measuring the speed of conduction of
electrical activity along the axon of the nerve cell and
further showed that the electrical activity of one nerve
cell affects the activity of an adjacent cell in predictable
ways.
Pharmacology made its first impact on our understanding of the nervous system and behavior at the end
of the 19th century when Claude Bernard in France,
Paul Ehrlich in Germany, and John Langley in England
demonstrated that drugs do not act randomly on a cell,
but rather bind to discrete receptors typically located
in the cell membrane. This insight led to the discovery
that nerve cells can communicate with each other by
chemical means.
Psychological thinking about behavior dates back
to the beginnings of Western science when the ancient
Greek philosophers speculated about the causes of
behavior and the relation of the mind to the brain. In
subsequent centuries, two major views emerged. In the
17th century, René Descartes distinguished body and
mind. In this dualistic view, the brain mediates perception, motor acts, memory, appetites, and passions—
everything that can be found in the lower animals. But
the mind—the higher mental functions, the conscious
experience characteristic of human behavior—is not
represented in the brain or any other part of the body
but in the soul, a spiritual entity. Descartes believed
that the soul communicated with the machinery of
the brain by means of the pineal gland, a tiny structure in the midline of the brain. Descartes’s position
has had little sway in modern philosophy or neural science. Indeed, the underlying premise of neural
science is that mind is a product of the brain and its
neural activity. By this we do not mean that the aim of
neural science is to explain away the mind by reduction
to biological components, but rather to elucidate the
biology of mind.
Attempts to join biological and psychological concepts in the study of behavior began as early as 1800,
when Franz Joseph Gall, a Viennese physician and
neuroanatomist, proposed a radically new idea of body
and mind. He advocated that the brain is the organ of
the mind and that all mental functions are embodied
in the brain. He thus rejected the Cartesian idea that
mind and body are separate entities. In addition, he
argued that the cerebral cortex was not a unitary organ
but contained within it many specialized organs, and
that particular regions of the cerebral cortex control
specific functions. Gall enumerated at least 27 distinct
regions or organs of the cerebral cortex; later many
more were added, each corresponding to a specific
mental faculty ( . Gall assigned intellectual processes, such as the ability to evaluate causality, to calculate, and to sense order, to the front of the
ity, to calculate, and to sense order, to the front of the
brain. Instinctive characteristics such as romantic love
(amativeness) and combativeness were assigned to the
back of the brain. Even the most abstract of human
behaviors—generosity, secretiveness, and religiositywere assigned a spot in the brain.
Although Gall’s theory of the unity of body and
mind and his idea that certain functions were localized
to specific brain regions proved to be correct, the dominant view today is that many higher functions of mind
are most likely highly distributed. Moreover, Gall’s
experimental approach to localization was extremely
An early map of functional localization in the
brain. According to the 19th century doctrine of phrenology,
complex traits such as combativeness, spirituality, hope, and
conscientiousness are controlled by specialized “organs,”
distinct areas of the cerebral cortex that expand as the traits
develop. These enlargements of local areas of the brain were
thought to produce characteristic bumps and ridges on the
overlying skull, from which an individual’s character could be
determined. This map, taken from a drawing of the early 1800s,
shows 42 intellectual and emotional “organs.”
naive. Rather than locate functions empirically, by
looking into the brain and correlating defects in mental attributes with lesions in specific regions following
tal attributes with lesions in specific regions following
tumor or stroke, Gall spurned all evidence derived
from studies of brain lesions, whether discovered
through clinical examination or produced surgically
in experimental animals. Influenced by physiognomy,
the popular science based on the idea that facial features reveal character, Gall believed that the bumps
and ridges on the skulls of people well endowed with
specific cognitive faculties identified the centers for
those faculties in the brain. He assumed that the size
of an area of brain was related to the relative importance of the mental faculty represented in that area.
Accordingly, exercise of a given mental faculty would
cause the corresponding brain region to grow, and
this growth in turn would cause the overlying skull to
protrude.
Gall first had this idea as a young boy when he
noticed that those of his classmates who excelled at
memorizing school assignments had prominent eyes.
He concluded that this was the result of an overdevelopment of regions in the front of the brain involved
in verbal memory. He developed this idea further
when, as a young physician, he was placed in charge
of an asylum for the insane in Vienna. There he began
to study patients suffering from monomania, a disorder characterized by an exaggerated interest in some
key idea or a deep urge to engage in some specific
behavior—theft, murder, eroticism, extreme religiosity. He reasoned that, because the patient functioned
well in all other behaviors, the brain defect must be
discrete and in principle could be localized by examining the skulls of these patients. Gall’s studies of
localized brain functions led to phrenology, a discipline
concerned with determining personality and character
based on the detailed shape of the skull.
In the late 1820s, Gall’s ideas were subjected to
experimental analysis by the French physiologist
Pierre Flourens. Using experimental animals, Flourens
destroyed some of Gall’s functional centers in the brain,
and in turn attempted to isolate the contribution of
these “cerebral organs” to behavior. From these experiments, Flourens concluded that specific brain regions
are not responsible for specific behaviors, but that all
brain regions, especially the cerebral hemispheres of
the forebrain, participate in every mental operation.
Any part of a cerebral hemisphere, Flourens proposed,
contributes to all the hemisphere’s functions. Injury to
any one area of the cerebral hemisphere should therefore affect all higher functions equally. Thus in 1823
Flourens wrote: “All perceptions, all volitions occupy
the same seat in these (cerebral) organs; the faculty of
perceiving, of conceiving, of willing merely constitutes
therefore a faculty which is essentially one.”
The rapid acceptance of this belief, later called
the holistic view of the brain, was based only partly
on Flourens’s experimental work. It also represented
a cultural reaction against the materialistic view that
the human mind is a biological organ. It represented
a rejection of the notion that there is no soul, that all
mental processes can be reduced to activity within the
brain, and that the mind can be improved by exercising it—ideas that were unacceptable to the religious
establishment and landed aristocracy of Europe.
The holistic view was seriously challenged, however, in the mid-19th century by the French neurologist
Paul Pierre Broca, the German neurologist Carl Wernicke,
and the British neurologist Hughlings Jackson. For
example, in his studies of focal epilepsy, a disease
characterized by convulsions that begin in a particular
part of the body, Jackson showed that different motor
and sensory functions could be traced to specific parts
of the cerebral cortex. The regional studies by Broca,
Wernicke, and Jackson were extended to the cellular
level by Charles Sherrington and by Ramón y Cajal,
who championed the view of brain function called
cellular connectionism. According to this view, individual neurons are the signaling units of the brain; they
are arranged in functional groups and connect to one
another in a precise fashion. Wernicke’s work and that
of the French neurologist Jules Dejerine revealed that
different behaviors are produced by different interconnected brain regions.
The first important evidence for localization
emerged from studies of how the brain produces language. Before we consider the relevant clinical and
anatomical studies, we shall first review the overall
structure of the brain, including its major anatomical regions. This requires that we define some essential navigational terms used by neuroanatomists to
tial navigational terms used by neuroanatomists to
describe the three-dimensional spatial relationships
between parts of the brain and spinal cord.
The Brain Has Distinct Functional Regions
The central nervous system is a bilateral and largely
symmetrical structure with two main parts, the spinal cord and the brain. The brain comprises six major
structures: the medulla oblongata, pons, cerebellum,
midbrain, diencephalon, and cerebrum. Each of these in turn comprise distinct
groups of neurons with distinctive connectivity and
developmental origin. In the medulla, pons, midbrain,
and diencephalon, neurons are often grouped in distinct clusters termed nuclei. The surface of the cerebrum and cerebellum consists of a large folded sheet
brum and cerebellum consists of a large folded sheet
of neurons called the cerebral cortex and the cerebellar cortex, respectively, where neurons are organized
in layers with stereotyped patterns of connectivity. The
cerebrum also contains a number of structures located
below the cortex (subcortical), including the basal ganglia and amygdala.
Modern brain imaging techniques make it possible
to see activity in these structures in living people. Brain imaging is commonly used to evaluate the metabolic activity of discrete regions of the brain
while people are engaged in specific tasks under controlled conditions. Such studies provide evidence that
specific types of behavior recruit the activity of particular regions of the brain more than others. Brain imaging
vividly demonstrates that cognitive operations rely primarily on the cerebral cortex, the furrowed gray matter
covering the two cerebral hemispheres
In each of the hemispheres, the overlying cortex
is divided into four lobes named for the skull bones
that overlie them: frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal. Each lobe has several characteristic
deep infoldings, an evolutionary strategy for packing
a large sheet of cortex into a limited space. The crests
of these convolutions are called gyri, and the intervening grooves are called sulci or fissures. The more
prominent gyri and sulci, which are quite similar from
person to person, bear specific names. For example,
the central sulcus separates the precentral gyrus, an
area concerned with motor function, from the postcentral gyrus, an area that deals with sensory function. Several prominent gyri are only visible
on the medial surface between the two hemispheres, and others are deep within fissures
and sulci and therefore only visible when the brain is
sliced, either in postmortem tissue or virtually, using magnetic resonance imaging.
Each lobe has specialized functions. The frontal
lobe is largely concerned with short-term memory,
planning future actions, and control of movement; the
parietal lobe mediates somatic sensation, forming a
body image and relating it to extrapersonal space; the
occipital lobe is concerned with vision; and the temporal lobe processes hearing, the recognition of objects
and faces, and—through its deep structures, the hippocampus and amygdaloid nuclei—learning, memory,
and emotion.
Two important features characterize the organization of the cerebral cortex. First, each hemisphere
is concerned primarily with sensory and motor processes on the contralateral (opposite) side of the body.
Thus sensory information that reaches the spinal cord
from the left side of the body crosses to the right side
of the nervous system on its way to the cerebral cortex.
Similarly, the motor areas in the right hemisphere exert
control over the movements of the left half of the body.
The second feature is that the hemispheres, although
similar in appearance, are not completely symmetrical
in structure or function.
The First Strong Evidence for Localization
of Cognitive Abilities Came From Studies of
Language Disorders
The first areas of the cerebral cortex identified as
important for cognition were areas concerned with language. These discoveries came from studies of aphasia,
a language disorder that most often occurs when certain areas of brain tissue are destroyed by a stroke, the
tain areas of brain tissue are destroyed by a stroke, the
occlusion or rupture of a blood vessel supplying a portion of a cerebral hemisphere. Many of the important
tion of a cerebral hemisphere. Many of the important
discoveries in the study of aphasia occurred in rapid
succession during the latter half of the 19th century.
Taken together, these advances form one of the most
exciting and important chapters in the neuroscientific
study of human behavior.
Pierre Paul Broca, a French neurologist, was the
first to identify specific areas of the brain concerned
with language. Broca was influenced by Gall’s efforts
to map higher functions in the brain, but instead of
correlating behavior with bumps on the skull, he correlated clinical evidence of aphasia with brain lesions
related clinical evidence of aphasia with brain lesions
discovered post mortem. In 1861 he wrote, “I had
thought that if there were ever a phrenological science,
it would be the phrenology of convolutions (in the
cortex), and not the phrenology of bumps (on the head).”
Based on this insight, Broca founded neuropsychology,
an empirical science of mental processes that he distinguished from the phrenology of Gall.
guished from the phrenology of Gall.
In 1861 Broca described a patient, Leborgne,
who as a result of a stroke could not speak, although
he could understand language perfectly well. This
patient had no motor deficits of the tongue, mouth,
or vocal cords that would affect his ability to speak.
In fact, he could utter isolated words, whistle, and
sing a melody without difficulty. But he could not
speak grammatically or create complete sentences,
nor could he express ideas in writing. Postmortem
examination of this patient’s brain showed a lesion in
a posterior inferior region of the left frontal lobe, now
called Broca’s area  . Broca studied eight
similar patients, all with lesions in this region, and
in each case the lesion was located in the left cerebral
hemisphere. This discovery led Broca to announce
in 1864: “Nous parlons avec l’hémisphère gauche!” (We
speak with the left hemisphere!).
Broca’s work stimulated a search for cortical sites
associated with other specific behaviors—a search
soon rewarded. In 1870 Gustav Fritsch and Eduard
Hitzig galvanized the scientific community when
they showed that characteristic limb movements of
dogs, such as extending a paw, could be produced
by electrically stimulating discrete regions of the
precentral gyrus. These regions were invariably
located in the contralateral motor cortex. Thus the
right hand, the one most used for writing and skilled
movements, is controlled by the left hemisphere,
the same hemisphere that controls speech. In most
people, therefore, the left hemisphere is regarded as
dominant.
The next step was taken in 1876 by Karl Wernicke,
who at age 26 published a now-classic paper,
“The Symptom-Complex of Aphasia: A Psychological Study on an Anatomical Basis.” In it he described
cal Study on an Anatomical Basis.” In it he described
another type of aphasia, a failure of comprehension rather
than speech: a receptive as opposed to an expressive malfunction. Whereas Broca’s patients could understand
function. Whereas Broca’s patients could understand
language but not speak, Wernicke’s patient could form
words but could not understand language and produced
senseless, yet grammatical, sentences. Moreover, the
locus of this new type of aphasia was different from
that described by Broca. The lesion occurred in the
posterior part of the cerebral cortex where the temporal lobe meets the parietal lobe ( .
ral lobe meets the parietal lobe ( .
On the basis of this discovery, and the work of
Broca, Fritsch, and Hitzig, Wernicke formulated a
neural model of language that attempted to reconcile
and extend the predominant theories of brain function
at that time. Phrenologists and cellular connectionists
argued that the cerebral cortex was a mosaic of functionally specific areas, whereas the holistic aggregate-field
tionally specific areas, whereas the holistic aggregate-field
school claimed that every mental function involved
the entire cerebral cortex. Wernicke proposed that only
the most basic mental functions, those concerned with
simple perceptual and motor activities, are mediated
entirely by neurons in discrete local areas of the cortex.
More complex cognitive functions, he argued, result
from interconnections between several functional
sites. By integrating the principle of localized function
within a connectionist framework, Wernicke emphasized the idea that different components of a single
sized the idea that different components of a single
behavior are likely to be processed in several regions
of the brain. He was thus the first to advance the idea
of distributed processing, now a central tenet of neural
science.
Wernicke postulated that language involves separate motor and sensory programs, each governed by
rate motor and sensory programs, each governed by
distinct regions of cortex. He proposed that the motor
program that governs the mouth movements for
speech is located in Broca’s area, suitably situated in
front of the region of the motor area that controls the
mouth, tongue, palate, and vocal cords ( .
He next assigned the sensory program that governs
word perception to the temporal lobe area that he had
discovered, now called Wernicke’s area. This region is
surrounded by the auditory cortex and by areas now
known collectively as association cortex, integrating
auditory, visual, and somatic sensations. According to
Wernicke’s model, the communication between these
two language centers was mediated via a large bundle
of axons known as the arcuate fasciculus.
Thus Wernicke formulated the first coherent neural model for language that is still useful today, with
ral model for language that is still useful today, with
important modifications and elaborations described in
Chapter 55. According to this model, the neural processing of spoken or written words begins in separate
cessing of spoken or written words begins in separate
sensory areas of the cortex specialized for auditory or
visual information. This information is then conveyed,
via intermediate association areas that extract features
suitable for recognition of spoken or written words,
to Wernicke’s area, where it is recognized as language
and associated with meaning.
The power of Wernicke’s model was not only its
completeness but also its predictive utility. This model
correctly predicted a third type of aphasia, one that
results from disconnection. In this type, the receptive and expressive zones for speech are intact but
tive and expressive zones for speech are intact but
the neuronal fibers that connect them (arcuate fasciculus) are destroyed. This conduction aphasia, as it is
ciculus) are destroyed. This conduction aphasia, as it is
now called, is characterized by frequent, sound-based
speech errors (phonemic paraphasias), repetition difficulties, and severe limitation in verbal working memory.
ties, and severe limitation in verbal working memory.
Patients with conduction aphasia understand words
that they hear and read, and have no motor difficulties
when they speak. Yet they cannot speak coherently;
they omit parts of words or substitute incorrect sounds
and experience great difficulties in verbatim repetition
of a multisyllabic word, phrase, or sentence that they
hear or read or recall from memory. Although painfully
aware of their own errors, their successive attempts at
self-correction are often unsuccessful.
Inspired in part by Wernicke’s advances and led
by the anatomist Korbinian Brodmann, a new school
of cortical localization arose in Germany at the beginning of the 20th century, one that distinguished func-
ning of the 20th century, one that distinguished functional areas of the cortex based on the shapes of cells
tional areas of the cortex based on the shapes of cells
and variations in their layered arrangement. Using
this cytoarchitectonic method, Brodmann distinguished
52 anatomically and functionally distinct areas in the
human cerebral cortex
Even though the biological evidence for functionally discrete areas in the cortex was compelling, by the
ally discrete areas in the cortex was compelling, by the
early 20th century, holistic views of the brain continued
to dominate experimental thinking and clinical practice
until 1950. This surprising state of affairs owed much
to several prominent neural scientists who advocated
the holistic view, among them the British neurologist
Henry Head, the Russian behavioral physiologist Ivan
Pavlov, and the American psychologist Karl Lashley.
Most influential was Lashley, who was deeply
skeptical of the cytoarchitectonic approach to functional mapping of the cortex. “The ‘ideal’ architec-
tional mapping of the cortex. “The ‘ideal’ architectonic map is nearly worthless,” Lashley wrote. “The
tonic map is nearly worthless,” Lashley wrote. “The
area subdivisions are in large part anatomically
meaningless, and misleading as to the presumptive
functional divisions of the cortex.” His skepticism
was reinforced by his studies of the effects of various
brain lesions on the ability of rats to learn to run a
maze. From these studies Lashley concluded that the
severity of a learning defect depended on the size of
the lesion, not on its precise location. Disillusioned,
Lashley—and after him many other psychologists—
concluded that learning and other higher mental
functions have no special locus in the brain and consequently cannot be attributed to specific collections
sequently cannot be attributed to specific collections
of neurons.
Based on his observations, Lashley reformulated
the aggregate-field view by further minimizing the
role of individual neurons, specific neuronal connections, and even specific brain regions in the produc-
tions, and even specific brain regions in the production of specific behavior. According to Lashley’s theory
tion of specific behavior. According to Lashley’s theory
of mass action, it is the full mass of the brain, not its
regional components, that is crucial for a function such
as memory.
Lashley’s experiments with rats have now been
reinterpreted. A variety of studies have shown that
the maze-learning used by Lashley is unsuited to the
search for local cortical functions because it involves so
many motor and sensory capabilities. Deprived of one
sensory capability, say vision, a rat can still learn to run
a maze using touch or smell. Besides, as we shall see
later in the book, many mental functions are mediated
by more than one region or neuronal pathway. Thus
a given function may not be eliminated by a single
lesion. This is especially germane when considering
cognitive functions of the brain. For example, knowledge of space is supported by numerous parietal asso-
edge of space is supported by numerous parietal association areas that link vision to a potential shift of the
ciation areas that link vision to a potential shift of the
gaze, turn of the head, reach of the hand, and so on. In
principle, any one of these association areas can compensate for damage of another. It takes a large insult
pensate for damage of another. It takes a large insult
to the parietal lobe to produce obvious deficits of spatial knowledge (spatial agnosia) (Chapter 59). Such an
tial knowledge (spatial agnosia) (Chapter 59). Such an
observation would have seemed to support theories of
mass action, but we now recognize that it is compatible
with localization of function that incorporates the idea
of redundancy of function.
Soon the evidence for localization of function
became overwhelming. Beginning in the late 1930s,
Edgar Adrian in England and Wade Marshall and
Philip Bard in the United States discovered that touching different parts of a cat’s body elicits electrical
ing different parts of a cat’s body elicits electrical
activity in distinct regions of the cerebral cortex. By systematically probing the body surface, they established
tematically probing the body surface, they established
a precise map of the body surface in specific areas of
the cerebral cortex described by Brodmann. This result
showed that functionally distinct areas of cortex could
be defined unambiguously according to anatomical
criteria such as cell type and cell layering, connections
of cells, and—most importantly—behavioral function.
As we shall see in later chapters, functional specialization is a key organizing principle in the cerebral
zation is a key organizing principle in the cerebral
cortex, extending even to individual columns of cells
within an area of cortex. Indeed, the brain is divided
into many more functional regions than Brodmann
envisaged.
More refined methods made it possible to learn
even more about the function of different brain regions
involved in language. In the late 1950s Wilder Penfield,
and later George Ojemann, reinvestigated the cortical
areas that are essential for producing language. While
locally anesthetized during brain surgery for epilepsy,
awake patients were asked to name objects (or use
language in other ways) while different areas of the
exposed cortex were stimulated with small electrodes.
If an area of the cortex was critical for language, application of the electrical stimulus blocked the patient’s
cation of the electrical stimulus blocked the patient’s
ability to name objects. In this way Penfield and Ojemann
were able to confirm the language areas of the cortex
described by Broca and Wernicke. As we shall learn in
Chapter 55, the neural networks for language are far
more extensive and complex than those described by
Broca and Wernicke.
Initially almost everything known about the anatomical organization of language came from studies
tomical organization of language came from studies
of patients with brain lesions. Today functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and other noninvasive
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) and other noninvasive
methods allow analyses to be conducted on healthy
people engaged in reading, speaking, and thinking
(Chapter 6). fMRI not only has confirmed that reading
and speaking activate different brain areas but also has
revealed that just thinking about a word’s meaning in
the absence of sensory inputs activates a still different
area in the left frontal cortex. Indeed, even within the
traditional language areas, individual subregions are
recruited to different degrees, depending on the way
we think about words, express them, and resolve their
meaning from the arrangement of other words (ie, syntax). The new imaging tools promise not only to teach
tax). The new imaging tools promise not only to teach
us which areas are involved but also to expose the
functional logic of their interconnection.
One of the great surprises emerging from modern methodologies is that so many areas of cortex are
ern methodologies is that so many areas of cortex are
activated in language comprehension and production. These include the traditional language areas,
tion. These include the traditional language areas,
identified by Broca, Wernicke, and Dejerine, in the left
hemisphere; their homologs in the right hemisphere;
and newly identified regions. Functional imaging
tends to elucidate areas that are recruited differentially, whereas lesions from stroke, tumor, or injury
tially, whereas lesions from stroke, tumor, or injury
distinguish brain areas that are essential for one or
more functions. Thus it appears that Broca’s area,
once thought to be dedicated to language production,
is in fact also involved in a variety of linguistic tasks
including comprehension ( . In some cases,
functional imaging invites refinement or revision
of the critical areas identified by lesion studies. For
example, reading is now thought to recruit specialized regions in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex in
ized regions in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex in
addition to the angular gyrus in the parietal cortex
(shown in  .
Thus the processing of language in the brain exemplifies not only the principle of localized function but
plifies not only the principle of localized function but
also the more sophisticated elaboration of this principle, that numerous distinct neural structures with
ciple, that numerous distinct neural structures with
specialized functions belong to systems. Perhaps this
is the natural reconciliation of the controversy concerning localized and distributed processes—that is,
cerning localized and distributed processes—that is,
a small number of distinct areas, each identified with
a small set of functions and contributing through
their interactions to the phenomenology of perception, action, and ideation. The brain may carve up a
tion, action, and ideation. The brain may carve up a
task differently than our intuition tells us. Who would
have guessed that the neural analysis of the movement
and color of an object would occur in different pathways rather than a single pathway mediating a unified
ways rather than a single pathway mediating a unified
percept of the object? Similarly, we might expect that
the neural organization of language may not conform
neatly to the axioms of a theory of universal grammar,
yet support the very seamless functionality described
by linguistic theory.
Studies of patients with brain damage continue to
afford important insight into how the brain is organized for language. One of the most impressive results
ized for language. One of the most impressive results
comes from the study of deaf people who have lost their
ability to communicate through the use of a signed language (eg, British Sign Language [BSL] or American
guage (eg, British Sign Language [BSL] or American
Sign Language [ASL]) after suffering cerebral damage.
Signed languages use hand movements rather than
vocalizations and are perceived by sight rather than
sound, but have the same structural complexity as
spoken languages. Sign language processing, as with
spoken language processing, localizes to the left
hemisphere. Damage to the left hemisphere can have
quite specific consequences for signing just as for spoken language, affecting sign comprehension (following
ken language, affecting sign comprehension (following
damage in Wernicke’s area), grammar, or fluency (following damage in Broca’s area). These clinical observa-
lowing damage in Broca’s area). These clinical observations are supported by functional neuroimaging. Not
tions are supported by functional neuroimaging. Not
surprisingly, production and comprehension of signed
and spoken languages do not involve identical brain
areas, but the overlap is truly remarkable ( .
There is even evidence that processing the constituent
parts of signs (eg, handshape used) involves some of
the same brain regions involved when making rhyme
judgements about speech.
These observations illustrate three points. First,
language processing occurs primarily in the left hemisphere, independently of pathways that process the
sphere, independently of pathways that process the
sensory and motor modalities used in language. Second, auditory input is not necessary for the emergence
ond, auditory input is not necessary for the emergence
and operation of language capabilities in the left hemisphere. Third, spoken language is only one of a family
sphere. Third, spoken language is only one of a family
of language skills mediated by the left hemisphere.
Investigations of other behaviors have provided
additional support for the idea that the brain has distinct cognitive systems. These studies demonstrate
tinct cognitive systems. These studies demonstrate
that complex information processing requires many
interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, each
concerned with processing particular aspects of sensory stimuli or motor movement and not others. For
sory stimuli or motor movement and not others. For
example, perceptual awareness of an object’s location, size, and shape relies on activity in numerous
tion, size, and shape relies on activity in numerous
parietal association areas that link vision to potential actions, such as moving the eyes, orienting the
tial actions, such as moving the eyes, orienting the
head, reaching, and shaping the hand to grasp. The
parietal areas do not initiate these actions but evaluate sensory information as evidence bearing on these
ate sensory information as evidence bearing on these
potentialities. They receive information from the dorsal visual stream—sometimes referred to as the where
sal visual stream—sometimes referred to as the where
pathway, but more aptly termed a how pathway—to
construct a state of knowing (gnosia) about the location and other spatial properties of objects. The ven-
tion and other spatial properties of objects. The ventral visual stream, or what pathway, is also concerned
tral visual stream, or what pathway, is also concerned
with possible actions, but these are associated with
socializing and foraging. These associations establish
gnosia about the desirability of objects, faces, foods,
and potential mates. In this sense, the what pathway
might be a how pathway too.
Mental Processes Are the Product of
Interactions Between Elementary Processing
Units in the Brain
There are several reasons why the evidence for the
localization of brain functions, which seems so obvious and compelling in retrospect, had been rejected so
ous and compelling in retrospect, had been rejected so
often in the past. Phrenologists introduced the idea of
localization in an exaggerated form and without adequate evidence. They imagined each region of the cer-
quate evidence. They imagined each region of the cerebral cortex as an independent mental organ dedicated
ebral cortex as an independent mental organ dedicated
to a complete and distinct aspect of personality, much
as the pancreas and the liver are independent digestive organs. Flourens’s rejection of phrenology and the
tive organs. Flourens’s rejection of phrenology and the
ensuing debate between proponents of the aggregatefield view (against localization) and the cellular con-
field view (against localization) and the cellular connectionists (for localization) were responses to a theory
nectionists (for localization) were responses to a theory
that was simplistic and without adequate experimental evidence.
tal evidence.
In the aftermath of Wernicke’s discovery of the
modular organization of language in the brain—
interconnected nodes with distinctive functions—we
now think that all cognitive abilities result from the
interaction of many processing mechanisms distributed in several regions of the brain. That is, particu-
uted in several regions of the brain. That is, particular brain regions are not fully responsible for specific
lar brain regions are not fully responsible for specific
mental faculties but instead are elementary processing
units that together have a role. Perception, movement,
language, thought, and memory are all made possible
by the interlinkage of serial and parallel processing
in discrete brain regions—computational modules—
within these regions. As a result, damage to a single
area need not result in the complete loss of a cognitive function (or faculty) as many earlier neurologists
tive function (or faculty) as many earlier neurologists
believed. Even if a behavior initially disappears, it
may partially return as undamaged parts of the brain
reorganize their linkages. Further, when focal damage adversely affects a mental function it may do so
age adversely affects a mental function it may do so
indirectly by disrupting the function of other principal loci (diaschisis). Indeed, observations of this nature
pal loci (diaschisis). Indeed, observations of this nature
led Wernicke’s student Kurt Goldstein to embrace the
more holistic view.
Thus it is not accurate to think of a mental function
as being mediated strictly by a chain of nerve cells and
brain areas—each connected directly to the next—for
in such an arrangement the entire process is disrupted
when a single connection is damaged. A more realistic metaphor is that of a process consisting of several
tic metaphor is that of a process consisting of several
parallel pathways in a network of modules that interact and ultimately converge upon a common set of
act and ultimately converge upon a common set of
targets. The malfunction of a single pathway within
a network may affect the information carried by that
pathway without disrupting the entire system. The
remaining parts of the network may be able to modify
their performance to accommodate the breakdown of
one pathway.
Modular processing in the brain was slow to be
accepted because, until recently, it was difficult to demonstrate which components of a mental operation were
onstrate which components of a mental operation were
mediated by a particular pathway or brain region. Nor
is it easy to define mental operations in a manner that
leads to testable hypotheses. Nevertheless, with the
evolving convergence of modern cognitive psychology
and brain science in recent decades, we have begun to
appreciate that mental functions can successfully be
broken down into subfunctions.
To illustrate this point, consider how we learn,
store, and recall information about objects, people, and
events. Simple introspection suggests that we store
each piece of our knowledge as a single representation
that can be recalled by memory-jogging stimuli or even
by the imagination alone. Everything you know about
an apple, for example, seems to be stored in one complete representation that is equally accessible whether
plete representation that is equally accessible whether
you see a particular apple, a part of an apple, a red or
green apple, the written word apple, or an apocryphal
story about the discovery of gravity. Our experience,
however, is not a faithful guide to how knowledge is
stored in memory.
Knowledge about apples is not stored as a single
coherent representation but rather is subdivided into
distinct categories and stored separately. One region of
the brain stores information about the way you would
hold the apple, the way you would feel for softness
(bearing on freshness), the color (bearing on preference
or freshness), the way you might communicate the
presence or taste of the apple to another person, as well
as its semantic association with computers, physicists,
worms, serpents, and biblical gardens. The concept
“apple” entails each of these considerations and many
more. A natural assumption is that a coherent concept
comprising many details must exist in a single place
in the brain; however, an equally valid assumption is
that a unified concept like “apple” exists in the mind in
the form of multiple links between a variety of neural
structures, each with a particular kind of information,
coordinated through the action of memory retrieval.
The most astonishing example of the modular
organization of mental processes is the finding that
our very sense of self—a self-aware being, the sum of
what we mean when we say “I”—is achieved through
the connection of independent circuits in our two
cerebral hemispheres, each mediating its own sense
of awareness. The remarkable discovery that even
consciousness is not a unitary process was made by
Roger Sperry, Michael Gazzaniga, and Joseph Bogen
in the course of studying patients in whom the corpus
callosum—the major tract connecting the two cerebral
hemispheres—was severed as a treatment for epilepsy.
They found that each hemisphere had a consciousness
that functioned independently of the other.
Thus while one patient was reading a favorite
book held in his left hand, the right hemisphere, which
controls the left hand but plays only a minor role in
language comprehension, found that the raw visual
information it received from simply looking at the book
was boring. The right hemisphere commanded the left
hand to put the book down. Another patient would
put on his clothes with the left hand while at the same
time taking them off with the other. Each hemisphere
has a mind of its own! In addition, the dominant hemisphere sometimes commented on the performance of
sphere sometimes commented on the performance of
the nondominant hemisphere, frequently manifesting a false sense of confidence regarding problems to
ing a false sense of confidence regarding problems to
which it could not know the solution, which was provided exclusively to the nondominant hemisphere.
vided exclusively to the nondominant hemisphere.
Such findings have brought the study of consciousness, once the domain of philosophy and psy-
sciousness, once the domain of philosophy and psychoanalysis, into the fold of neural science. As we shall
choanalysis, into the fold of neural science. As we shall
see in later chapters, many of the issues described in
this chapter reemerge in neural theories of consciousness. No one questions the idea that much information
ness. No one questions the idea that much information
processing—perhaps the lion’s share—does not reach
conscious awareness. When sensory information, a
plan of action, or an idea does become conscious,
neural science seeks to explain the mechanisms that
mediate this transition. While there is as yet no satisfactory explanation, some brain scientists would liken
factory explanation, some brain scientists would liken
the process to a shift in the focus of attention, mediated
by distinct groups of neurons, whereas others believe
that awareness requires a qualitative change in the
functional interaction between widely separated areas
of the brain.
The main reason it has taken so long to understand
which mental activities are mediated by which regions
of the brain is that we are dealing with biology’s deepest riddle: the neural mechanisms that account for con-
est riddle: the neural mechanisms that account for consciousness and self-awareness. There is at present no
sciousness and self-awareness. There is at present no
satisfactory theory that explains why only some information that reaches our eyes leads to a state of subjec-
mation that reaches our eyes leads to a state of subjective awareness of an item, person, or scene. We know
tive awareness of an item, person, or scene. We know
that we are consciously aware of only a small fraction
of our mental deliberations, and those thoughts that do
pierce conscious awareness must arise from steps carried out by the brain unconsciously. As we propose in
ried out by the brain unconsciously. As we propose in
Chapter 56, some answers to the riddles of consciousness may be closer than imagined.
ness may be closer than imagined.
Meanwhile, the current gap in our understanding also poses practical, epistemological challenges
ing also poses practical, epistemological challenges
for neural science. We cannot help but rely on our conscious experiences of the world, body, and ideation in
scious experiences of the world, body, and ideation in
our characterization of perception, behavior, and cognition. In doing so, however, we risk mischaracterizing
nition. In doing so, however, we risk mischaracterizing
many mental processes that do not pierce conscious
awareness. For example, we tend to characterize the
problem of perception in terms consistent with the
subjective experience of sensory information, whereas
even sophisticated but nonconscious knowledge of the
content of perception may have greater resemblance
to a behavioral utility (affordance), in effect an answer
to whether this is something I might choose to eat, sit
upon, or engage further. Similarly, cognitive processes,
such as reasoning, strategizing, and decision making,
are likely to be carried out by the brain in ways that
only loosely resemble the steps we infer from conscious deliberation.
scious deliberation.
These cautionary notes have a bright corollary.
The insight that many cognitive functions transpire
without conscious awareness raises the possibility that
principles of neural science revealed in the study of
more rudimentary behaviors can furnish insight into
more complex cognitive processes. Neural recordings
from the brains of animals trained to perform complex
tasks have led to an understanding of cognitive processes such as decision making, reasoning, planning,
cesses such as decision making, reasoning, planning,
and allocating attention. These experimental models
often extrapolate to human functions, and where they
fall short, they inspire new hypotheses. For more often
than not, there is inspiration if not insight to be gleaned
from the gaps in our understanding.
To analyze how the brain gives rise to a specific
mental process, we must determine not only which
aspects of the process depend on which regions of the
brain but also how the relevant information is represented, routed, and transformed. Modern neural science
sented, routed, and transformed. Modern neural science
seeks to integrate such understanding across many
scales. For example, studies at the level of both the single nerve cell and its molecular constituents elucidate
gle nerve cell and its molecular constituents elucidate
the mechanisms underlying electrical excitability and
synaptic connections. Studies of cells and simple circuits lend insights into neural computations, ranging
cuits lend insights into neural computations, ranging
from basic operations, like controlling net excitation,
to more masterful feats of computation, such as the
derivation of meaningful information from raw sensory data. Studies of the interactions between circuits
sory data. Studies of the interactions between circuits
and brain areas can explain how we coordinate widely
separated muscle groups or express a belief in a proposition. Knowledge at all these levels is knit together
osition. Knowledge at all these levels is knit together
by mathematical formalizations, computer simulation,
and psychological theory. These conceptual tools can
now be combined with modern physiological techniques and brain imaging methods, making it possible to track mental processes as they evolve in real time
niques and brain imaging methods, making it possible to track mental processes as they evolve in real time
in living animals and humans. Indeed, the excitement evident in neural science today stems from the
ment evident in neural science today stems from the
conviction that the biological principles that underlie
human thought and behavior are within our grasp and
may soon be harnessed to elucidate and improve the
human condition.
Highlights
1. The neural sciences seek to understand the brain
at multiple levels of organization, ranging from
the cell and its constituents to the operations of the
mind.
2.The fundamental principles of neural science bridge
levels of time, complexity, and state—from cell to
action and ideation, from development through
learning to expertise and forgetting, from normal function to neurological deficits and recovery.
mal function to neurological deficits and recovery.
As a first step, one must understand the building
blocks—the electrical properties of the nerve cell
and its connections to other nerve cells—and the
organization of the nervous system from supporting cells to pathways.
ing cells to pathways.
3.The neuron doctrine states that individual nerve
cells (neurons) are the elementary building blocks
and signaling elements of the nervous system.
4.Neurons are organized into circuits with specialized functions. The simplest circuits mediate
cialized functions. The simplest circuits mediate
reflexes; more complex cognitive functions require
more sophisticated circuits. This organizational
principle extends the neuron doctrine to cellular
connectionism.
5.Even within complex circuits, critical nodes can be
identified as areas associated with a specific function. The first clear evidence for localization of brain
tion. The first clear evidence for localization of brain
function came from the study of a specific impairment of language production.
ment of language production.
6.The two cerebral hemispheres receive information
from the opposite side of the body and control the
actions of the opposite side.
7.While the principle of localization of function in the
brain is superior to its main historical alternatives—
aggregate-field and the theory of mass action—it
is constantly being refined. No area of the cerebral
cortex functions independently of other cortical and
subcortical structures.
8.A major refinement of localization is the principle
of modular functional organization. The brain contains many representations of information organ-
tains many representations of information organized by both the relevance of certain features for
ized by both the relevance of certain features for
particular computations and by the variety of uses
to which such information may be put. This is a
form of redundancy with respect to purpose or
potential action.
9.The future of brain science will require integration
of ideas that cross the boundaries of traditional
disciplines. We must open our minds to a wide
variety of sources to guide our intuitions and strategies for research, from the sublime—the nature of
egies for research, from the sublime—the nature of
consciousness—to the seemingly mundane—what
general anesthesia does to a calcium sensor in the
ring of cells around the thalamus.
